Improvado helps marketing teams find answers in data, effortlessly.

Marketing reporting and campaign monitoring are largely manual routines and a huge hassle. On average, marketing teams:
‍leverage up to 92 marketing platforms and tools, daily
spend 20-40% of their time reporting on efforts
handle endless data exports and spreadsheets
struggle normalizing data and routing it to dashboards
believe that the increasing data complexity is a major blocker to applying and activating marketing data
attribute revenue to touchpoints across customer journeys.

Liberating marketing teams from data hassles provides them with more resources and dedication to manage campaigns, allocate budgets, make informed decisions, and achieve business success at scale.

Improvado is an advanced marketing analytics solution for data-driven marketing teams operating in large enterprises and businesses with a global presence.

We help businesses navigate to their goals, reliably and continuously. Our enterprise-grade platform automates marketing data pipelines—connects any data sources, ensures supreme data quality and accessibility, centralizes data and streams precise metrics to custom dashboards, enhances decision-making, connects all dots between marketing, sales, and financial data, and recreates customer journeys.

Improvado goes from vendor to partner—we provide you with a platform, tailor it to your requirements, activate informed decision-making, and go anywhere beyond with our savvy Professional Services team.

You're just a few clicks away from the shortest path to advanced marketing analytics—talk to one of our experts to start the journey.


Partnering with Improvado
We see partnerships as a long term relationship where we work together to better serve our customers.

Strategic partners
We partner with select market leaders and invest in deep integrations
that allow our customers to maximize the power of each platform.







Understanding the lead generation process
Lead generation is a process of attracting prospects and increasing their interests by nurturing them, with the final goal of converting them into a customer.

Lead generation strategies involve techniques to attract interested prospects and convert them into qualified leads. Some awesome channels to generate leads are company websites, social media handles, and advertisements.

Many marketers misunderstand lead generation for sales. In reality, lead generation is not about making sales; it’s about attracting qualified leads, which can be converted into customers down the sales pipeline. It means that lead generation is a part of the sales pipeline, not the entire sales pipeline.

The online lead generation process typically includes the following components:

Lead Capture: The odds are that most of your site visitors will never return to your site if you don’t capture a bit of their information. Start with capturing email addresses via lead generation landing pages.
Lead Magnets: There is always a gap between website traffic and leads. Fill this gap by providing their site visitors with valuable information in exchange for their contact information.
Lead Qualification: Analyze lead information to determine their likelihood of making a purchase.
Lead Segmentation: Segment the qualified leads based on their personas and level of involvement.
While the lead generation process typically has the same components, the lead generation strategies differ for every business vertical. That’s why it’s essential for marketers to craft a strategy that works for their specific niche.

Despite the strategies, one thing that remains common for lead generation in the modern world of marketing is AI-powered lead generation tools.

AI for lead generation is the new norm for marketers. But very few marketers know how to get the best out of AI for lead generation.

Hence, in the next section, we’ll talk about the top tactics you should use while utilizing AI for lead generation.

Top 10 tactics to use AI for lead generation
The following are the top 10 tactics to use AI for lead generation.

1. Utilize existing assets to generate more leads
Your business might already have a few AI-powered tools that you can use for lead generation.

The most common AI adoption for lead generation in the marketing segment is chatbots. These virtual assistants guide your website visitors through your products and services. You can use chatbots for multiple tasks, from initial customer interactions to connecting clients to the right customer support representative depending on their issues. I’ll discuss chatbots more at a later point.

The effectiveness of adopting AI-based software solutions hinges on the quality of the data you input, as it directly impacts the accuracy and effectiveness of your tools.

Inaccurate or low-quality data can compromise the performance of your AI lead generation tools, leading to ineffective targeting, affecting decision-making, and ultimately wasting resources. At large enterprises scale, even minor data inaccuracies can translate to significant financial and operational losses.

Gathering marketing data to feed to AI tools
Machine learning and AI algorithms should be trained before you can see actual results. The issue here is that gathering historical data about leads from tens of marketing and sales platforms is a time- and resource-consuming task.

To automate data aggregation, leverage a marketing data platform. These platforms automate the process of aggregating, organizing, and analyzing data from various sources. These solutions complement AI-powered lead generation tools and enhance their ability to generate targeted leads, personalize marketing messages, and optimize your overall marketing and sales strategies.


2. Create buyer profiles
You get tons of traffic on your website, and some of them buy products/services from you. You might already know that these are your actual customers, and you should focus more on getting more customers like them.

How can you get more customers like them?

Create buyer personas according to the profile of your ideal buyer. For the initial marketing strategies of a business, the buyer personas can be created as per the primary research.

But as your business grows and your website starts getting more traffic, you’ll have an opportunity to improve your buyer personas by using internal data.

This is where AI for lead generation comes in.

AI for lead generation can evolve your buyer personas towards personalization. AI and ML systems can create more accurate buyer personas by analyzing transactional and behavioral data from website visitors.

With more personalized buyer personas in place, you can tailor your marketing communication and strategies to generate better ROI from your lead generation efforts.

3. Score leads effectively
Predictive lead scoring is about determining which of your leads are ready to speak to the sales staff. Don’t you think it would be better if you ask your leads directly?

But emailing the leads manually will require significant time and valuable marketing resources.

This is where AI for lead generation comes into play. 

The AI-powered tools for lead generation can create email lists from the leads database and send them a simple, yet personalized, email message.

If you feed your AI-powered lead generation tool with prospects’ responses, it can start seeing patterns and data correlations, making your leads scoring more intelligent than ever.

While managing multiple email campaigns, it's easy to get lost in the context. Target audiences, ICPs, and multitudes of email marketing metrics make targeting much more complicated. Eventually, marketers often can't understand some campaigns perform better than others. 

Marketing data pipelines, such as Improvado, help to get the meaning of dull metrics such as email open rate and CTR. With a breakdown by audiences, company headcount, or target actions, it's much easier to understand the true reason behind the success or failure of a particular campaign. Plus, feeding AI algorithms with granular data will turbocharge your lead gen efforts.

4. Employ chatbots to streamline buying process
The customers’ buying journey needs to be as easy as possible. One crucial element of a streamlined buying process is effective communication.

AI-powered chatbots can automate customer communication. With more and more customers getting comfortable with virtual assistant interactions, now is the time for businesses to employ chatbots in their customer-facing interfaces to increase lead generation.

The following are benefits of adopting AI-powered chatbots for lead generation:

24/7 availability
Instant response
Help customers through purchase
Can be hyper-personalized for customers
Omni-channel implementation capability
Multilingual
And most importantly, cost-efficient option for customer interaction
AI-powered chatbots are quite advanced. They can use preset questionnaires that persuade the website visitors to share their details.

Bots can also qualify leads and nurture them as per their customer journey. For example, an AI-powered chatbot for an e-commerce business can provide customers with personalized recommendations and offers.

5. Provide personalized service with ease
Personalization is the latest marketing trend where brands need to improve their customers’ experience by offering personalized services.

AI can help brands infuse personalization into their lead generation efforts. AI-powered tools are capable of processing large quantities of customer behavior data. These datasets can provide your marketing tools with insights that you can use for marketing communication personalization.

Moreover, based on your lead’s likes and dislikes, the AI algorithms can recommend their favorite products/services.

A very popular example of personalized services can be the OTT platform’s recommendation engine that suggests content based on a user’s watch history and likes.

6. Use automated email campaigns to attract more leads
AI-powered lead generation tools can help marketers successfully automate email marketing campaigns.

AI tools for lead generation can take your prospects’ browsing histories into consideration to construct personalized emails. Not only this, the AI algorithms can understand email marketing metrics to identify which elements of the emails are working and which aren’t. 

This helps the AI-powered tools to optimize and writing the email body content, subject lines, delivery time, etc.

Once the AI-powered tools have ample lead data, they can help you restructure your email campaigns and even clean up your email lists.

Following is an automated abandoned cart email sent by Fig.1 to its customers.

The following are the benefits of AI for lead generation via email marketing:

Decrease email marketing cost
Optimize subject lines and email content automatically
Restructure email campaigns
Optimize email send time
Send automated email newsletters
Helps generate high revenue via email
7. Segment leads more accurately
AI-powered solutions use clustering algorithms to segment leads more accurately.

Segmentation is a part of personalized communication and services. AI algorithms make sure that the right content reaches the right person at the right time. And for this, they need to segment leads based on predefined attributes like sales lifecycle stage, likelihood to buy, lead source, etc.

For example, suppose some of your leads are acquired through offering free eBooks or PDFs. In that case, they’re already aware of your services, and your AI tool can segment them separately to personalize marketing communication to them.

You can program your AI tool for lead generation to offer these customers special discounts and free trials to get them onboarded as they’re already at the edge of their buying journey.

8. Optimize predictive analytics for better leads
With AI for lead generation, predictive analytics can be integrated into your marketing strategies to boost sales figures.

Predictive analytics help marketers recognize which leads they should pursue to get quicker and higher results.


AI-powered predictive analytics can process your existing data to determine your ideal customers among your pool of leads. This helps you reduce your time on crafting marketing campaigns for leads that are less likely to convert.

With filtered leads, you can craft your marketing communication for the leads that matter, which improves your chances of winning them over.

9. Analyze old data to form a pattern
Marketing isn’t like a chemical formula where predefined processes and results are guaranteed. You need to try and test strategies to generate leads and convert them. Using AI for lead generation can help with that. 

Every business’s marketing needs to keep adjusting as per the customers' evolving needs. And this is where it becomes essential for marketers to understand customers’ reactions to their past marketing campaigns.

Luckily, analyzing data to identify patterns is the core competency of AI technology.

The data analysis feature of AI for lead generation can help marketers work proactively. It allows them to analyze how visitors turned into leads and form a pattern for successful lead generation. 

Marketers can identify the campaigns that delivered higher lead generation and conversions. And based on these insights, they can formulate future strategies and campaigns.

10. Enhance the quality of the sales pipeline
Sales pipelines are the heart of your business. But businesses face two big challenges while building sales funnels. The first is refining the sales funnel, and the second is strategizing for cross or up-sells.

Both these challenges of lead generation can be mitigated with the help of AI technology.

For the first, AI-powered software can score leads more accurately than a human. AI algorithms are free of subjective bias and personal opinions, which makes them a perfect tool for refining the sales funnel.

As we’ve discussed earlier, AI algorithms are highly efficient in identifying patterns and trends; they can automatically score your leads and let you focus on high-quality leads that are more likely to convert.

For the second challenge, AI algorithms can predict every individual lead’s likeliness to buy additional services.

Coupled with ML, AI for lead generation can analyze the previous interactions with a particular lead to predict what products or services they’ll be most interested in. This allows marketers to focus on the specific products/services for these leads.

Moreover, having insights into leads’ likes and dislikes will eliminate the guesswork sales staff have to do. This also mitigates the risk of losing leads due to ineffective marketing communication.

AI for lead generation is the future
Undoubtedly, AI technology is beneficial for lead generation. Businesses from any domain can expect a more efficient sales pipeline that improves conversion rates.

With the help of AI technology, marketing tools have become more intelligent in organically boosting lead generation results.

If you haven’t implemented AI for lead generation strategies, now is the right time to implement a new digital strategy that includes AI and ML.

Lastly, it is essential to train your sales and marketing departments to use AI-powered tools so that you can make the most out of them.

Salesforce dashboards provide real-time data, insights, and performance metrics to sales and revenue teams, helping them make informed decisions and optimize processes.

There are various Salesforce dashboard types available, catering to the specific needs of different stakeholders within the sales process, such as sales/revenue team leaders, regular sales officers, and sales/revenue analysts.

Salesforce dashboards can be created using the platform's built-in functionality, Einstein Analytics, or automated with tools like Improvado.

A Salesforce dashboard is a comprehensive data visualization tool designed to offer real-time data and analytics for various aspects of an organization's operations, including sales, marketing, and customer service. It provides an easy-to-use interface to view important information such as lead conversion rates, deal closure rates, and revenue growth so that leaders, sales personnel, and analysts can make informed decisions based on overall performance.

Dashboards offer a holistic view of the sales pipeline, forecast accuracy, individual and team performance, and customer engagement metrics, ultimately contributing to improved sales effectiveness and business performance.

Salesforce dashboards are tailored to serve specific functions and cater to different organizational roles. By offering a targeted approach to analyzing the sales process, Salesforce dashboards empower sales leaders to identify challenges, monitor progress, and refine strategies for better results.

Salesforce dashboards offer numerous benefits for sales and revenue teams looking to optimize their processes and performance.

Salesforce dashboards deliver up-to-date, precise data, such as lead conversion rates, sales pipeline health, and customer satisfaction scores. It allows decision-makers to identify emerging trends, address potential issues, and make well-informed strategic choices based on the most recent data available.

Salesforce dashboards empower sales leaders and analysts with the data and insights to adjust sales strategies, scale what works, and fix what doesn’t. By leveraging these dashboards, leaders can better understand their sales processes, identify areas for improvement, and implement targeted solutions to drive growth and success.

By embedding analytics directly into the Salesforce user interface through integration with data visualization tools like Tableau Viz Lightning, users can access relevant data and insights without switching between different platforms. This integration allows users to monitor insights while staying in tune with their usual workflows. It enhances the overall efficiency, making it easier for them to make use of acquired insights and respond to changes in the sales landscape without disruptions.

Sales officers can benefit from a centralized command center for their day-to-day activities, such as meetings management, opportunity stages, and pipeline quality, leading to increased productivity and more effective time management.

Dashboards can help sales teams identify potential issues in their pipelines or sales processes early, enabling them to address these problems before they escalate and negatively impact the organization's performance.

The sales overview dashboard provides a high-level view of your organization's sales performance. It enables sales/revenue team leaders and VPs to monitor key sales metrics, track progress toward targets, and identify potential issues.

The pipeline generation dashboard focuses on the creation and management of sales opportunities. It helps sales teams understand their pipeline health, identify bottlenecks, and optimize their lead generation and qualification processes.

The account executive dashboard serves as a command center for individual sales representatives, enabling them to manage their day-to-day activities, track performance, and ensure they are focusing on the right opportunities.

The pipeline quality dashboard helps sales teams evaluate the health of their sales pipeline by providing insights into deal quality, stage distribution, and potential risks. This allows them to prioritize opportunities and address potential issues before they escalate.

The revenue forecast dashboard provides sales leaders with accurate and timely forecasts to help them understand whether marketing campaigns attract the right leads, how to allocate resources wisely, and plan their budgets.

In addition, you may also consider including key customer metrics in the relevant dashboards:

Customer Lifetime Value (CLV)
Customer Acquisition Cost (CAC)
Customer Churn Rate

By creating and customizing Salesforce dashboards, businesses can maximize the value of their data by having all key metrics in one place. This section will provide an overview of how to build Salesforce dashboards and discuss three popular creation methods.

Remember that building an effective Salesforce dashboard relies on your creativity and understanding of the data you're working with. Using Salesforce's built-in dashboard functionality, you can create visually appealing and informative dashboards that help your team monitor performance, identify trends, and make data-driven decisions. However, there are a few limitations to consider when using built-in Salesforce dashboards:

Limited data sources: The built-in Salesforce dashboard functionality primarily supports data from the Salesforce platform. If you need to visualize data from external sources, you may face challenges integrating and displaying that information.
Restricted customization options: While Salesforce offers a variety of chart types and components, the customization options may not be as extensive or flexible as those available in specialized data visualization tools like PowerBI and Tableau.
Scalability issues: As your business grows and the complexity of your data increases, you might encounter limitations in the built-in Salesforce dashboard functionality, which could hinder your ability to create and manage multiple dashboards efficiently.
Manual data management: Although Salesforce provides tools for managing and updating data, the process can be time-consuming and labor-intensive, especially if you're working with large datasets or must combine data from multiple sources.

Einstein Analytics is a tool within Salesforce that allows users to create interactive dashboards. By leveraging its different types of tables, including Values Table, Pivot Table, and Compare Table, users can go beyond traditional charts and widgets to provide more comprehensive insights into their data.

To create a dashboard with Einstein Analytics, follow these steps:

Navigate to the Einstein Analytics platform within Salesforce.
Click "Create" and select "Dashboard" from the dropdown menu.
Start by adding a chart, widget, or one of the three tables available in Einstein Analytics.
Values Table: Provides supporting details for a chart, allowing users to drill down into the data.
Pivot Table: Summarizes datasets and presents them from a different perspective, ideal for summary data.
Compare Table: Allows for comparing different data types with unique filters for different columns.
Customize the table or chart by applying filters, modifying the appearance, or adding interactivity through faceting or bindings.
If needed, use Salesforce Analytics Query Language (SAQL) to modify the query further or make changes that can't be achieved through the point-and-click interface.
Arrange your tables, charts, and widgets to create a visually appealing and insightful dashboard layout.
Save the dashboard and share it with the relevant stakeholders.
Although Einstein Analytics offers an effective way to create dashboards, there are some downsides to consider:

Complexity: Due to its advanced features and capabilities, Einstein Analytics can be complicated to navigate for users without prior analytics or technical experience. This may lead to a steep learning curve for some team members.
Time-consuming: Building and customizing dashboards with Einstein Analytics can be time-consuming, especially when dealing with large or complex datasets.
By using Improvado, you can overcome these challenges, as it helps to aggregate data across Salesforce and 500 other marketing and sales data sources and offers seamless flow of data to any dashboarding tool. Improvado is an accessible solution for creating and managing comprehensive Salesforce dashboards, even for users without extensive technical expertise.

Improvado is a marketing analytics platform that helps you pull data from Salesforce and other sources, merge it in a secure environment, and streamline to any data visualization tool of your choice. By using Improvado, you get precise data and clear-cut visualizations without applying any analytics or engineering skills.

Plus, the platform might save your team hundreds of hours per month by automating routine data operations. Consolidation of data across different sources usually takes weeks when done manually, but with Improvado it only takes minutes. 

With Improvado, you can merge data from over 500 sources, giving to build a cross-channel dashboard with data from Salesforce and other platforms like Google Ads, Facebook Ads, and HubSpot. This helps you gain a more comprehensive view of your business performance, as you can analyze your sales data alongside marketing and customer service metrics. 

Improvado automates the process of extracting, transforming, and loading your data from various sources, eliminating the need for manual data extraction and manipulation and saving you valuable time while reducing the possibility of errors.

Improvado enables you to access data more granularly, allowing you to create highly detailed and accurate dashboards. By offering granularity down to the channel, platform, ad set, and creative levels, you can gain deeper insights into your data and uncover trends or patterns hidden in aggregated data. With access to over 33,000 metrics, you can fully customize your dashboards to suit your business's specific needs, empowering you to make better, more informed decisions.

Improvado provides a centralized platform for managing data from all your sources, making it easier to keep your data organized and up-to-date. By consolidating data from multiple channels, you can create state-of-the-art dashboards that present Salesforce data in the context of cross-channel marketing performance. 

This comprehensive view lets you identify which channels attract high-value leads, generate more revenue, have lower CPAs, and more, leading to better decision-making and optimized marketing strategies. With Improvado, you ensure that your dashboards always display the most accurate and relevant information tailored to your business needs.

Improvado integrates with popular data visualization tools like Tableau, PowerBI, and Looker Data Studio, allowing you to create visually stunning and interactive Salesforce dashboards without coding or technical expertise. Additionally, Improvado offers a wide range of prebuilt templates that can be easily customized to suit your business needs. 

This significantly reduces the time and effort required to set up a dashboard. While creating a dashboard from scratch with Salesforce could take weeks, with Improvado, you connect a data source, choose a pre-built template, and it's ready. The streamlined process ensures a quicker and more efficient way to gain insights and make data-driven decisions.

Improvado offers extensive customization options for your dashboards, enabling you to tailor the appearance and functionality to your specific needs. You can choose a dashboard template and customize it to liking. Adjust colors, fonts, chart types, and data visualization styles to ensure your dashboards effectively communicate the insights and information you want to convey. 

Moreover, Improvado's user-friendly interface allows for simple drag-and-drop customization, making it easy for users with any analytics expertise to create and modify their dashboards. This high degree of customization ensures that your dashboards are visually appealing and provide the most relevant and actionable insights for your team.

In 2019 and 2020, TikTok may have ignited a brand-new social media revolution by becoming one of the most popular apps in the world. The platform caught fire during the global pandemic and became a household name seemingly overnight. Initially, people used TikTok for memes and dancing videos, but today it’s become one of the largest social media platforms with the highest engagement rates among competitors.

Marketers still trying to figure out Facebook ads when TikTok hit likely felt overwhelmed. Another social media account to manage? The feeling is valid, but TikTok is a whole new dimension for your company’s marketing stack.

Running ads on TikTok can be especially beneficial, and if you choose to do so, you’ll need a TikTok ads dashboard to measure your success. This article will teach you the basics of TikTok ad analytics and how to build your custom dashboard.

TikTok has a colorful history and a flourishing user base. The app boasts over 1 billion monthly active users (as of the last quarter of 2022), many of whom are younger Millennials and Generation Z. For brands trying to target those demographics, TikTok is the place to be. 

TikTok ads work in much the same way as other social media platforms. Short-form video content is all that TikTok displays on their users’ feeds, so you can create TikTok ads in that format and sponsor them to reach your target audience. Running TikTok ad campaigns is an excellent way to extend your current reach. 

Many social platforms allow you to tailor your ad campaigns to specific audiences, and TikTok is no exception, though they do have a surprisingly robust offering in this department. You can target viewers based on interests, demographics, and behaviors.

From there, you can present your ad in viewers’ “For You” feed, which is the curated selection of videos TikTok’s algorithm displays to users continuously. 

In-feed ads are a great opportunity to grab prospects’ attention. 68% of users find Ads on TikTok unique and different from any other platform. Plus, these ads are undistinguishable from regular TikTok content, with a CTA being the only difference between two types of content. So, you have a chance to advertise your product or tell a story about your brand without users recognizing that it was an actual ad. 

However, if your ad creative isn’t engaging enough or is overly salesy, users will most likely skip it immediately. That’s why you have to follow TikTok trends and fit into the feed with the right content to ensure the campaign’s success.

While brand takeover ads are certainly effective for raising awareness of your brand, product, or event, they might not be the best choice for TikTok Ads first timers because of their high price. 

Branded hashtag challenges are an advertising opportunity unique to TikTok, which makes your ads more exciting and engaging. These challenges prompt users to create videos showing themselves performing a specific action. This type of ad allows you to harness the power of User-Generated Content (UGC) and drive more awareness, leads, or credibility for your brand.

The main advantage of the branded hashtag challenge is the potential scale and reach of your campaign. If executed properly, millions of users can catch the trend and create content that benefits your brand. It’s impossible to achieve with regular influencer campaigns for example. This type of ad also boasts of 17 times higher engagement rates compared to regular campaigns across other platforms.

The cost of these ads will vary depending on the ad type, budget, targeting, and other factors. However, due to the nature and popularity of the app, it’s often more expensive than other social platforms like Facebook or Instagram.

For example, regular in-feed ads start at 10$ per CPM. Besides, you have to spend at least $500 per campaign to advertise on TikTok. 

As per other ad types, TikTok hasn’t been very transparent about the cost of advertising. However, marketers and influencers claim that a brand takeover campaign that ensures 5 mln+ impressions starts from $50,000 per day. The hashtag challenge might cost you $150,000 per week.

Reporting is an integral part of advertising on TikTok. Whether you need to measure the impact of your finished campaigns or optimize some of the ongoing ones, you always need to dive into performance metrics first.

Typically, reporting isn’t on the marketer’s high-priority list of tasks. They often copypaste metrics in a spreadsheet to get a high-level overview of the campaign’s performance. Then, everything is pretty straightforward. If the campaign’s ROAS is positive, the team launches it again. If the ROAS is negative, they ditch the campaign and come up with something new.

However, a coherent reporting is crucial for TikTok Ads for several reasons:

TikTok ad performance is harder to measure compared to regular display ads. For example, UGC campaigns usually take more time to deliver results, so marketers have to keep sharp eye on metrics and don’t jump to conclusions
Large-scale TikTok campaigns are expensive, so teams have to take them responsibly and keep track of their marketing dollars

That’s where a TikTok ads dashboard comes in. Picture this: A single source of truth for performance data across all campaignsthat displays all KPIs in a visual, easily digestible format. Charts and graphs make it much easier to understand the results campaigns achieve and facilitate better communication. 

Naturally, many marketers rely on TikTok’s in-app dashboard. It’s an automatic report with real-time updates and fundamental insights into your account. For marketing teams that use TikTok as their primary acquisition channel, this report might be enough. It shows all the crucial metrics and provides shows you what’s working and what’s not with your TikTok campaigns.

However, things become much more complex when you have to report on performance across different ad platforms, website, paid search, and other channels.

For example, your TikTok campaign sends prospects to your website after they click on your ad. TikTok’s in-app dashboard will only record the number of clicks generated by the campaign. If you need to go further and know how many visitors from your TikTok campaign turned into customers, you’ll have to check this data in Google Analytics or any other web analytics tool you use.

In case you’re running ads across multiple platforms, you’ll have to use each platform’s dashboard and compare it with your web analytics data. Given that in-app dashboards often show metrics biased towards their platforms, the entire reporting process might turn into a nightmare.

A cross-channel dashboard can save you 90% of the time you spend on manual reporting and protect you from invalid data that often pops up while drawing up your report manually.

Being strategic about the metrics you include in your dashboard is essential. Building a custom TikTok dashboard is more of an investment than using in-app analytics, so you want to extract maximum value from it. 

Here are some essential TikTok metrics and KPIs to get you started.

Impressions
You should include this standard metric on every dashboard. Impressions measure the number of people to whom you’ve exposed your ad. Keep in mind that TikTok users often scroll endlessly, so they might see your ad several times, and each of these are counted as individual impressions.

Return On Ad Spend (ROAS)
Many brands forget to track their ROAS, but you shouldn’t overlook this crucial metric. You can consider it a more specific extension of your ROI, as it measures the value of your ad spend dollars.

Click-Through Rate (CTR)
Your click-through rate measures the number of users that clicked on an ad to your landing page or desired external link. It's important to track this metric to gauge the effectiveness of your ads in driving traffic to your target destination. Dashboards display this data as a line chart to visualize trends over time.

Cost Per Click (CPC)
CPC on TikTok works the same as it does on other platforms. How much are clicks costing you on the platform? This metric lets you know. 

Conversion Rate (CR)
Tracking your conversion rate is essential on every single platform you use for marketing. It’s arguably the most critical metric since it tells you how many impressions you’ve converted into customers. 

View Time
This one shows the total time users spend watching your ads. It's important because it indicates how engaging your ads are to your target audience. View time is usually presented using a line chart to track changes in view time over a period, which can help identify trends and potential areas for improvement.

Video Completion Rate (VCR)
VCR measures the percentage of users who watched the entire ad. This metric indicates the effectiveness of the ad in retaining viewers' attention. VCR can be displayed as a percentage on a bar chart to easily compare different ads' performance.

Engagement Rate
The total number of actions (likes, comments, shares) on your ad divided by the number of views. A high engagement rate indicates that the ad is resonating with the audience. You can present engagement rate as a percentage on a bar chart to compare the performance of various ads.

Cost per Engagement (CPE)
CPE is the average cost of each engagement (like, comment, share) on your ad. Monitoring CPE helps to ensure your ads are generating valuable interactions at an acceptable cost. A line chart is ideal for tracking CPE over time and identifying trends.

Bounce Rate
It’s not exactlyTikTok Ads metrics, but a crucial web analytics Bounce rate is the percentage of users who clicked on your ad but left your website after viewing only one page. A high bounce rate could indicate that the ad is not effectively targeting the right audience. Display bounce rate as a percentage on a bar chart to compare the performance of different ads.

Manual reporting and data entry takes much of your team’s time and resources. While performance measurement is fundamental for every healthy marketing campaign, the time and effort it takes to draw up a report and keep it up to date make marketing analytics unsustainable.

Instead, you can automate the process and get insightful cross-channel dashboards with real-time data. Improvado can source data from 500+ sources (including a TikTok integration). Then, it cleans your data from duplicates and any redundant data entries that are common when exporting data via APIs.

After a quick setup you can choose one of Improvado’s dashboard templates that aligns with your marketing goals and analyze how your campaigns perform, which platforms drive the highest ROI, and what you can do to improve your cross-channel performance.  



Social media has changed the paid advertising landscape. Gone are the days when Google Ads was your only option for pay-per-click (PPC) campaigns. Now you can run PPC ad campaigns on nearly all social media platforms, including Twitter. 

Twitter reports that users “spend 26% more time viewing ads on Twitter than they do on other leading platforms,” so when managed well, Twitter advertising has the potential to drive a solid ROI.

To measure the performance of your Twitter PPC campaigns, you need a Twitter Ads dashboard. This article will teach you more about data visualization and how to approach paid advertising from a data-driven perspective. 

Twitter Ads is a paid advertising platform that allows you to sponsor posts to reach a larger audience
A Twitter Ads dashboard can help you visualize your data and quantify the performance of your paid advertising efforts on Twitter’s platform
The top three benefits of a Twitter Ads dashboard are improved decision-making, increased efficiency, and greater transparency
Some key metrics to use when building your dashboard are Ad Clicks, Ad Spend, Click-Through Rate (CTR), Cost-Per-Thousand (CPM), Post Likes, and Content Engagement

What Are Twitter Ads?
Twitter Ads work similarly to paid advertising options on other social platforms. With Twitter Ads, you can reach a wider audience by paying to promote your tweets. 

Twitter also allows advertisers to target specific users. By setting your ad campaigns to reach those that share your ideal audience's interests, demographics, and behaviors, you can generate leads from social media in a more precise and targeted way, increasing your odds of a positive ROI. 

Twitter Ads allow you to promote a range of content, including:

Tweets
Videos
Images
Leveraging data is essential if you want to optimize your Twitter Ads performance. The question is: How do you view that data? This is where a Twitter Ads Dashboard can prove useful. 

A Twitter Ads dashboard is a marketing dashboard that visually displays your Twitter Ads data. This tool can display the essential metrics and KPIs for your paid ad campaigns, which you can use to create actionable strategies. 

When you input metrics into a Twitter analytics dashboard, you can easily track how your ads are performing. 

When creating a Twitter Ads dashboard, it's important to choose the right visualization type for each metric you want to track. The right visualization can help you identify trends and insights more easily, making it easier to optimize your campaigns for maximum ROI.

Here are some examples of visualizations that could be used in a Twitter Ads dashboard:

Line charts
Line charts are a great way to visualize changes in a metric over time. For example, you could use a line chart to track changes in ad spend over the course of a month or quarter. This could help you identify trends in spending and adjust your budget accordingly.

Heat maps
CTR heat map for a Twitter Ads dashboard‍
Heat maps are useful for visualizing geographic data. Heat maps might be used to visualize where ads are getting the most engagement. This could help you target your ads more effectively in specific regions.

Bar charts
Bar charts are useful for comparing different metrics side-by-side. For example, you could use a bar chart to compare the click-through rates (CTR) of different ad variations. This could help you identify which ads are performing best and adjust your campaigns accordingly.

Scatter Plots
Engagement scatter plot for a Twitter Ads dashboard‍
Scatter plots are useful for visualizing the relationship between two metrics.Hence, you can visualize the relationship between ad spend and post likes with the help of a scatter plot. This could help you identify whether there is a correlation between these two metrics and adjust your spending accordingly.

When choosing a visualization type, it's important to consider the type of data you're working with and the insights you want to uncover. For example, if you want to identify trends over time, a line chart may be the best option. If you want to compare different metrics, a bar chart may be more effective. It's also important to choose a visualization type that is easy to read and understand, as this will help you communicate your insights to other stakeholders.

Twitter reporting can be challenging because there are many key metrics to sort through. A dashboard solves that issue by streamlining and visualizing your data, making it easier to digest and report. Stakeholders grasp the results easier when in-house or outsourced marketing teams provide visuals.

Beyond that, there are many other advantages to using a Twitter Ads dashboard. Here are the top three benefits of implementing a data visualization tool into your workflow.

1. Improved Decision-Making
Businesses across all industries understand the importance of data-driven strategies. Having a constant feedback loop that’s visual, accessible, and user-friendly makes it easy to dive into data regularly. 

2. Increased Efficiency
Having a centralized data hub for your marketing channels is a game changer. Your team and stakeholders can access the same information at any time of day or night. This makes communication more efficient and strategy sessions more productive. 

If you automate the data collection process, you’ll take things further and eradicate manual reporting. Automated dashboards can save your team 27% of their time. 

3. Greater Transparency
Transparency fosters trust and a better awareness of results. Stakeholders (clients or higher-ups) not recognizing a campaign’s ROI is a common frustration for marketing teams. It can be easy to miss a few critical KPIs when combing through lengthy and complex spreadsheets. 

A Twitter Ads dashboard provides greater transparency across teams and facilitates more efficient communication. 

Even though In-App Twitter analytics shows a lot of information regarding your Twitter Ads performance, it often fails to demonstrate a bigger picture of your marketing performance. Let’s figure out why this happens and what can be done to change it.

Limited Cross-Channel Visibility
Twitter's in-app analytics only allows for analysis of data generated within the Twitter platform. This means that you can only see data related to your Twitter Ads campaigns and how they are performing within the Twitter platform.

The reason for this limitation is that Twitter isn’t designed to be a marketing analytics tool. You can’t consolidate data from different sources in Twitter Ads Manager.

Consequently, if you are running ads on Twitter and Facebook, you would need to use two in-app analytics tools to get a grasp of your marketing performance. Twitter's in-app analytics would only show you data related to your Twitter Ads campaigns, while Facebook's analytics tool would only show you data related to your Facebook Ads campaigns.

There are certain differences in how each platform collects and analyzes data. Each platform maps data differently, has different naming conventions for their metrics, and a whole lot of other other differences. As a result, teams turn to using spreadsheets as a quick way to aggregate all performance metrics. 

More advanced marketing teams leverage marketing analytics platforms to consolidate marketing reporting.

For example, enterprise-level teams use Improvado to automate their marketing analytics. Improvado integrates with 500+ marketing and sales platforms to pull together all your performance data and create a holistic picture of marketing performance. 

The platform transforms your insights into a cohesive, easily-digestible format that makes data readily available for analysis. After you choose a dashboard from Improvado’s library of templates, the platform will automatically load all data to a visualization tool of your choice. Improvado provides templates for over 15 popular dashboarding tools, so you’ll definitely find something suitable to your use case. 

In other words, Improvado frees marketers from data hassle and lets them do marketing. It's a no-code solution that automates all analytics processes and supplies teams with actionable insights about marketing performance. Book a consultation with a company representativeto see the platform in action. 

If you’re running campaigns across multiple platforms and drive acquired traffic to yourwebsite, you probably understand how crucial it is to have a proper attribution process in place. Without it, you can’t understand which campaigns result in conversions and revenue, and which of them should optimized to get better results. 

Unfortunately, native Twitter analytics tools doesn’t allow for effective marketing attribution. Yes, Twitter offers its own tracking pixel for website conversion tracking. 

However, it has some significant drawbacks. First of all, it’s yet another piece of custom code that you have to implement on your website. Considering that you already have Google Analytics tracking pixel, custom events, and various third-party software (e.g., a live chat app), Twitter Pixel will only degrade your website performance and increase webpage loading time.

Secondly, Twitter Pixel is somewhat biased towards Twitter. Meaning, it might attribute more conversions to Twitter Ads than it really influenced. It’s nothing new that discrepancies often occur between Google Analytics and ad vendors third-party tracking solutions. And the reason for these discrepancies is that tracking pixels aren’t 100% precise and straightforward.

That’s why it’s better to aim for marketing analytics platforms that don’t require additional tracking pixels. For example, Improvado seamlessly integrates with your existing web analytics platform to track journeys and build user profiles. You can use Google Analytics, Adobe Analytics, or any other pixel directly with Improvado. 

Your dashboard is only as effective as the metrics you put into it. Being intentional about which metrics to include is essential to gaining the most value from your dashboard. 

‍
Here are a few metrics to consider

Ad Clicks
As the name suggests, Ad Clicks count the number of times users click on your ads

Ad Spend
The Ad Spend metric monitors how much money you’ve spent on paid ads. You can filter this data based on specific ad variations, campaign(s), or ad sets

Click-Through Rate (CTR) 
Your CTR is an essential metric for comparing the number of clicks your ad link received vs. the number of impressions

If your ad receives a lot of impressions (views) but only a few clicks, this could mean something is off with your campaign targeting

Cost Per Mille (CPM)
Another valuable metric to track is your CPM, which tracks the cost of 1,000 ad impressions

Post Likes
Though some might feel that likes are merely a vanity metric, they can be helpful to track if you’re looking to quantify engagement. You can measure the number of likes a specific tweet receives, or a designated set of tweets.

Content Engagement
Content Engagement offers a more holistic perspective by measuring all engagement results from your Twitter profile.

Manual reporting and data collection is a pain in the neck for every marketing team. While performance measurement is fundamental for every healthy marketing campaign, the time it takes to draw up a report renders the entire marketing analytics process unviable.

However, it doesn’t have to be that way. You can automate the process and get insightful cross-channel dashboards with real-time data. Improvado streamlines data from 500+ sources (including a Twitter Ads integration). Then, it cleans your data from duplicates and any redundant data entries that are common when exporting data via third-party APIs.

After connecting your data sources you can choose one of Improvado’s dashboard templates that fits your business needs. Improvado will automatically populate the template with data so you can instantly start analyzing how your campaigns perform, which platforms drive the highest ROI, and what you can do to improve your cross-channel performance.  



Whether you’re a marketer for an Amazon seller or an agency managing the ad spend of multiple Amazon storefronts, understanding Amazon advertising data is critical. As many marketers know, Amazon is one of the most competitive online platforms. That’s why paying for sponsored ads on product listings is often necessary to stand above the competition. 

Using an Amazon ads dashboard can fuel your efforts to make data-driven decisions about your sponsored listing spend. Understanding SEO, targeting, and sponsored product reports can be daunting for in-house marketing teams and agencies. It’s often difficult to discern the accuracy of your data across multiple report types. An in-depth understanding of these reports is essential to managing pay-per-click (PPC) spending on Amazon’s platform and making strategic decisions. 

PPC advertising is critical to success on Amazon
Amazon Advertising is a platform helping sellers and marketers manage their Amazon PPC ads (including sponsored listings, brands, and more)
All businesses should use a dashboard to visualize their Amazon advertising data for greater visibility and ROI
Some key metrics to track on your Amazon ads dashboard include clicks, impressions, the average cost of sales (ACoS), return on ad spend (ROAS), sales, and ad spend.
Improvado can help your business drive higher ROAS by automating your Amazon Ads analytics.

The Basics of Amazon Advertising
Pay-per-click (PPC) advertising is one of the most crucial elements of an effective Amazon advertising campaign. While optimizing your product listings for higher organic search positions is a right thing to do, they often don’t jump to higher positions overnight. Following SEO best practices alone won’t get your listing to the top. You also need to have a competitive amount of sales and reviews from verified users to rank higher. That’s why investing marketing dollars into a solid paid strategy can help you generate new sales and, at the same time, improve your listings’ search positions.

Sponsored product listings can be expensive—especially if you don’t know how to allocate your spending and plan your campaign correctly. This is where Amazon analytics is handy for sellers and marketers of all sizes. Understanding the basics of Amazon advertising can help you create a good PPC campaign. Learning how to create a comprehensive data dashboard allows you to visualize the results of your campaigns. 

Before we dive into the details, let’s touch on what Amazon advertising is. Essentially, it’s an umbrella term used to label all of the platform’s advertising solutions, and it can be broken into two categories: 

1. Self-Service Amazon PPC: These are advertisements you pay for to appear on Amazon itself. In other words, these include your sponsored product listings, which are most likely the type of sponsored content you care about the most. Brand Registered and otherwise professional sellers trying to extend their reach and expand their audience use PPC ads. Amazon’s PPC ads are the most common advertising on the platform. Besides sponsored product listings, they include sponsored brands and sponsored display ads. 

2. Managed-Service Amazon DSP: These advertisements are shown on Amazon’s platform and across the web. They’re CPM ads, or cost per thousand impressions. This self-managed platform is offered to sellers who sell on Amazon and those who don’t, but want access to Amazon’s data on customer purchasing behavior to more precisely target their advertising. These types of advertisements typically require a large budget and dedicated support from an Amazon Advertising account executive. From there, they can help you set up an Amazon DSP service.

This article will discuss Amazon Ads, or Amazon Advertising (not Seller Central, which is for managing your Amazon store). Amazon Advertising is designed to help you manage your Amazon PPC ads (including all sponsored listings, brands, and more). 

PPC stands for pay-per-click, meaning you pay Amazon every time a potential customer clicks on your Amazon ad. Mind that you’re only paying for a click. If the prospect clicks on your listing and doesn’t purchase you still have to pay for this click.

You can set up any PPC ad campaign in just a few minutes. The cost of the campaign, however, depends on the type of ad you’re placing, which keywords you’re targeting, and how competitive the market is. 

When planning and executing a PPC campaign on Amazon, you must keep track of crucial metrics. Luckily, this is where Amazon pulls through with provided metrics to help you track each campaign’s success. One of the best ways to know how your advertising efforts influence Amazon sales is to visualize marketing data on an Amazon ads dashboard. 

Using a marketing dashboard to visualize your data is one of the best ways to internalize and interact with meaningful metrics. An Amazon ads dashboard is a marketing dashboard you can build to display all required metrics in a visually engaging, easily digestible way. 

Think of your Amazon ads dashboard as a central information hub. Whether you’re a marketing agency that needs to deliver reports to your clients selling on Amazon or an in-house marketing team with an Amazon seller, you need a dashboard. Dashboards make it easy to share information and report the results of marketing efforts.
Essentially, dashboards make reporting on Amazon ads a breeze.

In theory, Amazon Ads dashboard can help you find lots of unobvious trends and significantly improve ROI of your ppc campaigns. However, the dashboard is not a panacea. It’s crucial to understand which areas of your Amazon marketing it can improve to avoid overexpectations. So, let’s dive into areas that can be improved with an Amazon dashboard.

It helps you get measurable results
One of the most frustrating parts about marketing is quantifying your results. When stakeholders and clients ask about their spending, they want concrete evidence that their investment is effective. Many marketing teams still rely on spreadsheets to communicate, but those can be lengthy and confusing. 

A dashboard lays out the most critical data and metrics in a clean, straightforward way leading to actionable insights. Your clients and stakeholders won’t have to scroll through endless spreadsheets without understanding the effects of marketing efforts. Everyone will be on the same page. 

It enables collaboration across team members
The same goes for your internal team. Implementing a dashboard allows for more effective internal communication. When you tell your team members a particular metric is part of a common goal, they’ll visualize that metric’s relationship to the whole. 

It makes your analytics more effective
Instead of relying on sales and revenue as your primary success metrics, you can dive into more granular indicators. CTR, impressions, cumulative reach, keyword search volume, and loads of other metrics can help you get actionable insights into every campaign you launch. 

With different levels of granularity you can easily compile a high-level overview for stakeholders as well as optimize campaigns based on derived insights from low-level data.

Overall, using an Amazon ads dashboard is critical to your overall success. When you use a dashboard, you benefit from greater transparency, clear picture of your ROI, in-depth insights into your audience behavior and buying intent, and more.

What Metrics to Include in an Amazon Ads Report
Now that you’ve decided to use an Amazon ads dashboard, you must know how to populate it. Amazon Ads, as well as any other platform, offers quite a lot of metrics you can track. And, this often leads to a question “What am I looking at?”. So, selecting the right metrics is crucial to make the dashboard informative, and, at the same time, concise. 

Below are some of the most universally beneficial Amazon Advertising metrics to track on your dashboard report. Having a firm grasp on these metrics can help you set goals, strategize, and gain a competitive edge with your ad campaigns.

Impressions
You might be familiar with impressions metrics from your Google PPC ads or social media advertising, which work in essentially the same way on Amazon. Impressions will show how many times Amazon displayed your ad to a customer.

Clicks
This critical metric shows how often someone has clicked on your Amazon ad. If the idea of invalid clicks enters your mind, Amazon is one step ahead. They adjust the report for invalid clicks (accidental or otherwise) within three days, which is immensely helpful for accurate reporting. 

Average Cost of Sales (ACoS)
Amazon Ads dashboard: how to calculate ACoS
This valuable metric measures the effectiveness of your sponsored ads. It represents the percentage of ad-generated sales spent through advertising. ACoS is one of those metrics that will go a long way with clients and stakeholders. It provides a quantifiable number to show them the value of their dollar. 

How to Manually Calculate ACoS
To calculate your ACoS, divide the amount you spent on ads by how much revenue your ads generated. In other words, if you spent $100 on advertising, and it brought in one sale of $200, your ACoS would be 50%.

Return on Ad Spend (ROAS)
Monitoring your ROAS has several benefits, especially for understanding the efficiency of your campaigns. Whenever a company engages in new marketing efforts, a crucial question is whether that investment is worth it. 

Marketing dollars are worth it when they drive additional revenue, which is precisely what this metric determines. What is the value of your marketing dollars, and specifically your ad spend dollars?

How to Manually Calculate ROAS
ROAS is the inverse of the ACoS metric: if you have a ROAS of 6, that means that for every dollar you spent on ads, you collected $6 in revenue. 

Sales
The sales report shows the number of product sales generated within a week of ad clicks. 

A good Amazon Ads dashboard allows you to track sales across different regions, demographics of your buyers, and more. Here’s an example of Improvado’s dashboard with sales breakdown by different states:

Amazon Ads dashboard: sales breakdown by regions
Ad Spend
Another clear metric is spend, which tells you how much you invest in a particular ad campaign. Ad spend equals the total number of click charges per product ad.


Drive Higher ROAS with an Improvado-Built Amazon Ads Dashboard
Improvado is a marketing analytics platform that helps companies collect and visualize marketing data in a single, functional and easy-to-use environment. The platform integrates with 500+ marketing and sales platforms to automatically pull data and transform it into actionable insights. 

Ecommerce is one of Improvado’s primary areas of focus. With its help, you can easily extract over 600 different metrics and data dimensions from Amazon Ads and Amazon DSP and create a single source of truth for your paid advertising data. 

What would take days to gather and transform data can be done with Improvado in a few minutes. Simply choose the required marketing platforms, turn the connection on, pick the metrics of your choice, and Improvado will do the rest for you.

The platform also offers a wide range of ready-made dashboard templates for all the popular visualization tools (Looker Studio, Tableau, Power BI, etc.). After you choose the template, Improvado automatically puplates it with business-ready data so you’re ready to start analyzing. All templates can be customized in a way you need to match the metrics you want to monitor and objectives you want to achieve with analytics.

Additionally, the Improvado team offers help with building custom dashboards and provides analytical guidance for complex omnichannel ecommerce use cases.

Improvado is a smart way to jumpstart your analytics 10X faster and scale your BI efforts using extensive library of data sources than building dashboards on your own. 

Book a consultation with Improvado’s team today to learn more about how they can drive you to your marketing goals. 

Frequently Asked Questions
What Are Amazon Sponsored Ads?
Amazon Sponsored Ads are a form of pay-per-click (PPC) advertising available to sellers and vendors on Amazon's marketplace. They help businesses promote their products and increase visibility among potential customers by displaying targeted ads in search results and on product detail pages. Sponsored Ads help sellers and vendors drive more sales by reaching shoppers who are actively searching for products similar to theirs.

What Are Amazon Advertising Reports?
Amazon Advertising Reports are detailed data and analytics reports provided by Amazon to help sellers and vendors understand the performance of their advertising campaigns. These reports offer insights and metrics that help advertisers optimize their marketing efforts, make data-driven decisions, and ultimately increase the return on investment (ROI) for their advertising budget.

What Are the Different Types of Amazon Sponsored Ads
There are three primary types of Amazon Sponsored Ads:

Sponsored Products: These ads promote individual product listings and appear in search results or on product detail pages. They're targeted based on keywords that the advertiser selects, and they're designed to help increase product visibility and sales.
Sponsored Brands: These ads showcase a brand logo, a custom headline, and a selection of products from the brand's catalog. They appear in prominent locations within search results, such as the top or middle of the page. Sponsored Brands ads are designed to help businesses increase brand awareness and drive sales for multiple products.
Sponsored Display: These ads are display ads that can appear on Amazon's website, its mobile app, and third-party sites within Amazon's advertising network. Sponsored Display ads use audience targeting to reach potential customers based on their browsing behavior, shopping history, and demographics. These ads are meant to drive brand awareness, retarget shoppers, and generate more sales.
What Is the KPI for Amazon Ads?
For Amazon Ads, there are several KPIs that advertisers can track to measure the performance of their Sponsored Products, Sponsored Brands, and Sponsored Display campaigns. Some of the most important KPIs for Amazon Ads include:

Impressions
Clicks
Click-Through Rate (CTR)
Cost Per Click (CPC)
Advertising Cost of Sales (ACoS)
Return on Ad Spend (ROAS)
Total Sales.
Conversion Rate.


Instagram is a central hub for sharing content, experiences, thoughts, and perspectives. And it's only growing. In terms of engagement rate Instagram confidently holds second place after Tiktok. Even though Instagram's 0,6% is well away from TikTok's whopping 4,25%, it's still miles better than Facebook's 0,15% and Twitter's 0,05%. 

For anyone wondering if Instagram is still relevant to their business, consider that it's still the most downloaded app in the world (followed by TikTok, Facebook, and WhatsApp, respectively). 

However, advertising on Instagram without analyzing your marketing efforts may quickly drain your marketing budget. In this guide, we discuss how to build a comprehensive Instagram analytics dashboard, what metrics to include, and how to get the most out of Instagram data. 

Key Takeaways

Social media analytics is crucial to a successful marketing strategy
Instagram is a relevant platform for numerous industries and is still growing
Using an Instagram dashboard is an effective way to visualize your data
Third-party dashboard tools are more efficient than Instagram’s in-app offering in almost every scenario
Some of the most important metrics to track on Instagram are engagement rates, impressions, follower growth, and top-performing posts
Three best practices for building an Instagram dashboard include combining data to see the big picture, automating the process where possible, and using data to visualize and tell a story.
Marketing analytics platforms can streamline your Instagram analytics experience and provide actionable insights.
Why Instagram Analytics Matter
Which one of your recent posts got the most engagement in the past two weeks? How about last month? Which hashtags are the most valuable for your audience? Which ones are you using most frequently? These are important questions that require answers if you want to achieve more with your marketing campaigns, creatives, or messaging. Tracking your Instagram metrics will help you find those answers. 

Consider the following allegory. When you’re sick, you go to the doctor. A healthcare professional runs various tests and analyzes your symptoms. With all the data, they can find out what’s malfunctioning inside your body. Then, doctors and nurses pull all the reports and charts together to understand the full scope of your condition. 

Monitoring Instagram engagement metrics is about the same thing. With all the data about your Instagram efforts, you can diagnose what isn’t working—and adjust your strategy accordingly. 

A insights-driven strategy considers all past mistakes and failures. This guarantees more cost-efficient and scalable campaigns.

Why You Should Use an Instagram Dashboard
When you think about analytics for Instagram, you likely envision long, grueling spreadsheets and enormous piles of data. However, it doesn’t have to be this way. Manual reporting and building charts in spreadsheets is only good if you need to test something or find a quick answer to your question. However, using this approach in your day-to-day activities always results in wasted time and untrustworthy data. And - why so?

Copypasting Instagram metrics to your spreadsheet will eventually result in mistakes. You either accept this fact or spend more time double checking your data. Now, imaging running hundreds of campaigns, collecting all that data, and gazing at each data cell afterwards to find a mistake. It easily away the better part of the week if you want to have data worth working with.

On the other hand you have an Instagram analytics dashboard. With its help you can represent your data in any way you want in a convenient interface of popular BI tools. From simple line charts to mosaic and scatter plots, you can show your data any way you want. 

If Instagram is your main acquisition source, your business could benefit from a dedicated Instagram analytics dashboard for better transparency, visibility, and accountability for marketing activities.

The Basics of Instagram Analytics 
There are two ways to monitor your Instagram analytics and visualize your data:

Use a third-party dashboard builder 
Use Instagram’s in-app analytics platform. 
Both carry pros and cons, so let’s start with an overview of the in-app offering. 

In-App Analytics
Instagram’s in-app analytics is a useful resource for marketing professionals, but it comes with a decent number of limitations. The built-in reporting tool provides basic insights into your account performance, which can be useful when checking on a data point you’re already familiar with. 

Instagram’s platform can offer fundamental insights into performance metrics such as:

Reach
Followers
Engagement
Advertising results
Post-specific data
And more
So, if Instagram already provides professional accounts with in-app analytics (and even a dashboard overview), why consider a third-party tool?

There’s actually more than just one reason.

Third-Party Tools
A third-party analytics tool is essential for marketing professionals who need more than a basic glance at simple metrics. 

You can find robust, feature-rich platforms that allow you to create beautiful-yet-understandable dashboards featuring advanced performance metrics. While in-app analytics provides just the basic performance metrics, such as reach, clicks, and engaged accounts, third-party tools allow you to calculate metrics more valuable to your business, such as CAC, cost per engaged account, revenue generated by paid and organic posts, and more. 

You also get much better visualization capabilities compared to Instagram’s basic in-app charts. Since Instagram is optimized for mobile, the app’s provided analytics are also mobile-oriented. This can be a significant limiting factor, making reporting challenging or even completely inaccessible. Using a robust third-party dashboard means you can dive deeper into your reports on your desktop or laptop as well, expanding the scope of your analytical efforts. 

But the true killer feature of third-party analytics tools is that they allow to merge Instagram data with performance metrics from other channels on a single dashboard. And that means you can understand how your Instgram campaigns compare to other channels and what practices from other platforms you can implement to improve your Instagram account performance.

Besides, a comprehensive dashboard may help you capture trends faster and make informed decisions about your overall marketing strategy.

Take a look at Improvado’s organic social dashboard that allows you to explore posts, reach, views, engagement rates, and clicks across all your social channels. Having both quick overview of your channels and detailed breakdown of each campaign’s performance improves decision-making and facilitates campaign optimization.  

Improvado’s organic social dashboard
Now, it’s time to understand which metrics are key for the platform and how to track them on your dashboard.

Instagram Metrics to Include In the Dashboard
As with any marketing channel, your data is only as good as the metrics you’re tracking. That’s why it’s essential to grasp which metrics matter most to the individual platform or a group of platforms you’re visualizing on a dashboard. Social media comes with different factors when compared to web content, though each platform has its own KPIs.

On Instagram, you’re concerned with the amount of engagement you receive, just like on other social media platforms. However, there is an increased focus on follower growth. It’s one of the most important metrics to monitor. 

Below, you’ll find some of the most important metrics to track when building your analytics platform: 

Social media marketing is about one thing above all others—engagement. Though you can pop into your audience's inbox with email marketing and develop valuable resources on your website, no marketing channel facilitates direct engagement quite like social media. 

Instagram is no exception, which is why it’s vital to track your engagement rate.

Think of engagement rate tracking as keeping a pulse on your Instagram marketing efforts. This metric acts as a lifeline, letting you know how things are truly doing. Your engagement rate is the percentage of your following that regularly interacts with your content, considering the number of likes and comments you receive on a post in relation to your overall follower count.

Impressions
daily impressions chart
If you’ve ever dabbled in analytics, you’re likely already familiar with this metric. Impressions on Instagram work largely in the same way they do on the web. This metric is tracking the number of people who have been exposed to your account. 

You can filter that data by a specified period if you want to understand how a certain campaign has impacted your impressions.

Follower Growth
Follower tracking on Instagram is similarly crucial. Unlike simply tracking the number of likes you’re getting on a post, your follower growth is not a vanity metric. You aren’t just keeping tabs on your existing follower count—you’re actively monitoring the growth rate of your following.

Gaining a large number of followers quickly doesn’t always equate to actual conversions, but that doesn’t mean your following shouldn’t grow steadily if your campaigns are effective. Tracking your follower growth is important to see whether you’re trending upward or downward. 

Top Performing Posts
Another common social media metric that remains applicable and valuable for Instagram is your top-performing posts. When your team begins crafting the next campaign, knowing what has worked best in the past is helpful. This can assist you in understanding what your audience is drawn to and how to reach them in future campaigns.

Improvado’s Instagram organic posts dashboard
3 Best Practices For Building An Instagram Dashboard
When building your ideal Instagram analytics dashboard, you must ensure you’re creating the most valuable central hub you can. To do that, follow these best practices for building an Instagram data hub. 

Combine Data to See the Big Picture
Using a dashboard can be incredibly beneficial in allowing teams to see the big picture. With in-app analytics your marketing vision is limited to a single channel. But a dashboard lets you combine your data and KPIs into a single source of truth to get a bird’s-eye-view. So, combining your data is crucial to make unbiased decisions and optimize your cross-channel marketing effort. 

Automate When Possible
Automation is critical in any analytics-tracking venture. Don’t waste your time with DIY solutions with manual data collection—opt for a solution that automatically sources data from Instagram and generates actionable insights based on said information.

Improvado is just what it takes to create an actionable analytics dashboard. The platform integrates with 500+ marketing and sales data sources to pull required metrics, turn it into a digestible form, and streamline to a visualization tool of your choice. 

Instead of wasting time drawing identical pie and bar charts in spreadsheets you get access to a library of customizable dashboard templates for social media, paid ads, web analytics, and other use cases. Improvado’s templates allow you to start analyzing in days, not weeks or even months.

Jumpstart your marketing analytics with Improvado
Improvado integrates with 500+ data sources to build a comprehensive dashboard for you. On a 30-min call, you can tell us more about your analytics objectives to get a dashboard tailored to your needs.

Use Data Storytelling and Visualizations
Telling a story with data is one of the most important skills to have when communicating results to stakeholders. Use your Instagram dashboard to show how each metric relates to the next. What effect do your top-performing posts have on your engagement rate? How does your follower growth impact your reach? Find the story in the numbers, then convey that story on your dashboard for best results.

Use a Marketing Analytics Platform to Squeeze the Most out of Instagram Data
Focusing on social media performance is crucial to understanding marketing’s team impact on the organization’s bottom line. However, you need clear-cut data to design your perfect Instagram analytics dashboard that’ll fuel your decision-making. Opting for a platform that only provides data visualization without automating the sourcing of that data and transforming it into actionable insights is not an efficient way to operate. 

Instead, use a platform designed to handle all steps of the data journey, from extraction to visualization.

Improvado is an automated marketing analytics platform that sources data from 500+ sources (including Instagram and other social media platforms). With Improvado you get all the same features as when using SQL and BI tools, but in a zero-code environment. Connect your data sources, choose a template, and Improvado will automatically visualize data in a way you need.

In case your needs go beyond Improvado’s library of data sources or metrics, Improvado can fulfill any custom needs in the shoretest terms. The platform can help you develop custom dashboards from scratch or take care of advanced data queries with Professional Services offering. So, whether you’re aiming for a plug-and-play Instagram dashboard or a customized dashboard for your specific use case, Improvado got you covered. 

Why is it important to track Instagram analytics?
Tracking Instagram analytics is essential for optimizing content, understanding your audience, and making data-driven decisions. By monitoring engagement, assessing content performance, identifying trends, evaluating growth, setting goals, and conducting competitor analysis, you can refine your strategy, improve your account's performance, and achieve your objectives on the platform.

What's an Instagram dashboard?
An Instagram dashboard is a centralized interface that displays key Instagram data and insights, helping users monitor their account's performance, track engagement, and effectively optimize their marketing strategy.

What metrics are used on Instagram?
Key Instagram metrics include follower count, engagement (likes, comments, shares, saves), reach, impressions, profile visits, click-throughs, and audience demographics (age, gender, location, active hours).

What are best practices to build an Instagram dashboard?
Best practices for building an Instagram dashboard include:

Goal identification
Picking relevant metrics
Data visualization
Customization.
Regular updates.



Modern organizations generate enormous amounts of data, which can be hard to manage and follow. Data governance tools help adjust data-related processes, making it easier to manage data access, collaborate on insights, and deal with terabytes of information scattered around the company.

A single data asset may undergo hundreds of modifications a day, so it’s hard to tell where something has gone wrong without the right tool. From minor miscalculations to massive data leaks, incorrect information exposes everything to risks.

We’ve outlined the 11 best data governance tools and their features, so you can start handling your data the right way, faster. We’ve also explained how data governance helps businesses and individual business users better handle data, manage access, and set privacy policies.

Is that what you were looking for? Then let’s get started.

Table of contents:‍

Data governance in a nutshell

How data governance benefits businesses, analysts, and marketers‍‍

• Benefits for businesses

• Benefits for analysts

• Benefits for marketers

4 things to consider before choosing a data governance tool

• The problems you’re planning to solve‍

• The type of data you operate

• ‍The features of a data governance tool

• ‍The types of teams and specialists working with your data

Top 11 data governance tools to optimize your insights and make informed decisions

#1 Axon Data Governance

#2 SAP Master Data Governance‍

#3 Alation‍

#4 Apache Atlas‍

#5 Semarchy xDM

#6 OvalEdge‍

#7 Oracle Enterprise Metadata Management

#8 Immuta

#9 IBM InfoSphere Information Governance Catalog‍

#10 Google Cloud Data Catalog

#11 Atlan

Put your data infrastructure ahead of the competition with Improvado

Data governance in a nutshell
💡Data governance is the process of organizing data and managing its availability, usability, security, and integrity in an organization for efficient use of data in the company’s strategic activities.

Data governance involves various tools, specialists, regulations, and performance metrics to ensure consistent and reliable insights. With well-designed data flows, organizations can define who can access data, what actions they can take in relation to it, by what methods, and much more.

As a result, businesses achieve a golden mean between data security and accessibility. By balancing these two factors, data governance provides the optimal conditions for analysts and other users to get the most value out of their data while keeping it safe from misuse.


How data governance benefits businesses, analysts, and marketers
Before diving into the tool discovery phase, we need to determine what benefits data governance brings to companies at large and individual users within the company.

Benefits for businesses
The majority of data-centered companies have one major drawback: data silos.

💡A data silo is a dataset owned by one group (e.g., a department) that other groups in the same organization can’t easily access.
Organizations solve this problem in different ways. And different ways may lead to different outcomes.

🧰 Learn how to remove data silos inside your organization with marketing data centralization. 🧰

The fun part comes when companies grant excessive access to data to each and every employee. That’s when junior employees accidentally modify crucial datasets, someone deletes backup files, or your accountant downloads sensitive data onto a pen drive and loses it in the nearest cafeteria. That’s what we call 100% transparent data processes.

Data governance determines who can access data and what actions each person can take in relation to the dataset.

Data stewards, one of the leading roles in data governance projects, maintain data control and data access management.

Key benefits:

Full control over the data access provided to employees
Increases data security
Eliminates data silos without the risk of data exposure
Benefits for analysts
Data governance is not only about setting up regulations. It’s also about providing analysts with self-service BI tools.

According to Forbes, 78% of executives and analysts recognize the value of data governance in business intelligence processes. Inconsistent data and multiple versions of truth make the analysis process much more complicated than it has to be.

With a well-thought-out data governance process, analysts can focus on their primary tasks: analyzing data and extracting valuable insights from it.

Key benefits:

Increased productivity among analysts
Increased quality of insights for analysts
Quick and simple access to the required data
Benefits for marketers
Marketers and marketing analysts also benefit from data governance.

Due to the absence of data silos between marketing and sales departments, marketers can quickly access insights about lead quality, new opportunities, customer reviews, and more. Previously, it could take hours of meaningless communication before the sales team would share the required insights. With data governance, marketers can access them with just a couple of clicks. 

Data granularity is another important benefit for analysts.

Manual data uploads from tens of marketing platforms often lead to inconsistent performance metrics and numbers. Poorly merged marketing numbers show misleading results from quarter to quarter and don’t allow for informed decision-making.





Marketing data cleansing stages
Even with the most advanced and well-thought-out data schemas, some inconsistencies are inevitable. That’s why it’s important to set up a data cleansing process to fix any data inconsistencies on an ongoing basis. The data cleansing process usually consists of five essential steps. Let’s consider each of them in detail.

Step #1: Data validation
Data validation is the process of verifying the accuracy and quality of the extracted data before taking any further action with it.

It would be unwise to assume that all data about your leads (names, emails, company names, etc.) has been entered correctly in the database. There are numerous ways to spoil data, ranging from data source malfunctions to human errors. This is particularly true for manually entered records.

That’s why data validation is the first and most essential stage on the path to data hygiene.

There are five main types of data validation:

Data type validation. Confirms that the entered data is the correct data type (numeric, string, etc.)
Code validation. Ensures that the given data field is selected from an existing list of values and adheres to a specific list of formatting rules. For example, if you gather postal codes, you need to match your records against a list of valid codes and make sure they are stored in the correct format
Data range validation. Verifies whether given data falls within a certain range. For example, marketers conduct surveys using a scale that ranges from 0 to 10 to calculate the Net Promoter Score (NPS). Any values that fall outside of this range are invalid.
Data format validation. Ensures that data is stored in a proper format. For example, date columns often use a format like “"YYYY-MM-DD” or “DD-MM-YYYY”. To avoid errors, incoming data should be stored in the specified format.
Consistency validation. Verifies the logical sequence of stored data. For example, the purchase date should follow the registration date, not the other way around
Uniqueness validation. Some records, such as IDs, emails, etc. are unique. This type of validation ensures that there are no duplicates of unique items.
Step #2: Aligning data formats
The second step in marketing data cleansing is to bring all metrics together in a unified form. The problem of disparate naming conventions is one of the most common in marketing data. We’ve already explained that the same metric on different platforms may have different names.

When using tens of different marketing and sales tools that don’t talk to each other, marketers waste hours figuring out what’s working and what’s not. Keeping an eye on each metric’s name and mapping all sources manually is a real pain in the neck.

For the sake of time and data granularity, marketers use automated solutions to align all metrics. For example, Improvado’s MCDM (Marketing Common Data Model) automatically normalizes disparate naming conventions and supplies analysts with analysis-ready data.

The platform frees up to 20% of marketing analysts’ time by automatically matching all data fields and normalizing heterogeneous data. With its help, marketing analysts can fast-forward routine data manipulations and dive straight into the analysis process.

Step #3: Getting rid of duplicates
With standardized data formats, the next step is to check your dataset for duplicates that were missed during the previous stages.

Duplicate entries are dangerous for multiple reasons. First off, if the same entry appears several times, the quality of the whole dataset deteriorates. You can no longer determine how effective your campaign is if the metrics don’t match up.

Furthermore, duplicates become a real problem for companies dealing with predictive and prescriptive analytics.

Learn what prescriptive analytics is and how to reach analytics maturity with our guide.

When machine learning models receive false data, they will output unexpected results. This leads to biased performance estimates and disappointing results in future marketing campaigns.

In fact, duplicate cleansing isn’t the hardest thing to do if analysts have some basic technical expertise. For example, in SQL, a primary data cleansing operation can be done with a few simple queries. You can:

Find duplicates using the GROUP BY or ROW_NUMBER() functions.
Use the DELETE statement to eliminate duplicate data rows.
However, this basic example is only true for small databases with a small number of records. The more data columns you have, the more actions you have to take with your data. Besides, processing large amounts of data requires significant computing power, which the average marketer usually doesn’t have at their disposal.

Instead of SQL, marketers can also use automated data transformation tools to get rid of duplicates without SQL queries. Let’s review the automated data transformation process using the example of Improvado.

Improvado’s DataPrep allows marketers to automate the data transformation process and convert raw data into actionable insights in a no-code environment. Marketing and sales specialists can work in a familiar spreadsheet-like UI with drag-and-drop functionalities. The tool offers ready-made transformation recipes that help marketers merge disparate data in a single table.

The platform also supports custom transformation to meet the varying needs of marketing and sales analysts. Furthermore, built-in decision trees help teams enrich datasets and optimize data to achieve better analysis outcomes. By using the clustering feature, marketers can also find non-obvious data groups and identify similarities within a dataset.

Step #4: Normalizing missing and incomplete data
After getting rid of duplicates, the next step is to fill in the missing data and fix inaccurate values. Incomplete data lowers the overall quality of the database and doesn’t allow for a precise analysis.

Incomplete or incorrect data often happens when different tools collect information in different ways. For example, some tools may record the city as “New York” while others may use “NY”.

Let’s assume that we have a database with company addresses that includes the following parameters:

State
Town
ZIP code
District
Street
Some records might have missing data rows that don’t allow the complete address of the company to be identified and the records to be sorted for further analysis. There are two ways for analysts to solve this problem:

Delete all records with empty values in any of the fields. This is the fastest option, but it also leads to the loss of significant amounts of data.
Fill in the missing data. Some data, such as state or ZIP code, is easy to find when you already have information about the town and street. Even though this approach takes more time, analysts can save lots of valuable data. If it’s not possible to fill in the missing information, the data row should be deleted completely.
The majority of marketing analysts fill in their incomplete data manually, wasting a lot of time on data collection and entry. However, companies with advanced analytics use proficient tools to automate this process.

For example, Edwin Tan, a data science specialist with over eight years of experience in different companies, shares his experience with Pandas in this guide. He explains how Pandas (the Python data science library) can be used to deal with missing data. The guide covers many approaches, such as:

Fill with Constant Value
Fill with Mean
Forward Fill
Back Fill
Interpolation
Etc.
Step #5: Identifying conflicts in the database
The final step of the marketing data cleansing process is conflict detection. Conflicting data are insights that contradict or exclude each other. At this stage, analysts’ main goal is to identify contradicting data and eliminate it.

Let’s get back to our example from Step #4. It appears that the state doesn’t match the ZIP code or the town mentioned in the dataset.

This type of mistake is difficult to fix because there’s no way to tell what exactly is incorrect: the ZIP code or the town. The best option here is to double-check the source or contact the person who entered this information into the database to figure out the details.

If that’s impossible, the record should be marked in the database. In this way, analysts will know that this information is unreliable and can omit it during the analysis.


Marketing data cleansing: best practices and strategies
Now that we’ve covered the basics of marketing data cleansing, it’s time to move on to the best practices and strategies.

Apply SQL
SQL-based data cleansing is one of the most common and at the same time complicated approaches to data hygiene. It allows raw data to be altered without any third-party tools and provides the most extensive functionalities for manipulations with the dataset.

The main problem with this approach is that marketers must know SQL and have a solid engineering background, which is a rarity for the majority of marketing analysts.

Of course, marketers can get comfortable with basic SQL queries to perform high-level data transformations. For example, Sayak Paul, a machine learning engineer at Carted, explains common data cleansing techniques in his guide for DataCamp. The guide proves that knowing several queries can help with cleansing messy data and deduplicating your dataset.

However, datasets differ, and there’s no one-size-fits-all approach to marketing data cleansing. A dataset with millions of records requires a lot more transformations than a dataset with a hundred records. That’s why analysts have to master SQL to deal with large databases and achieve more granular insights.

Choose an automated data cleansing tool
Apart from SQL, there are a lot of automated tools and programming languages that accelerate the data cleansing process and take the burden of routine work off analysts.

Let’s consider some of the most popular programming languages first.

Python
Python is a universal tool for data scientists and analysts. The language is versatile and has an intuitive syntax, and it also offers a number of libraries for data scientists and engineers.

For example, Pandas is an open-source Python library for data analysis. It was specifically designed for data wrangling and pre-processing. The library takes data in CSV and TSK file formats. Moreover, it can process a whole SQL database and create Python objects based on it. 

The library allows you to manipulate, merge, and sort data, as well as plot your datasets, input incomplete data, and more. These features make Pandas a fundamental library for data science and analytics.

Another well-known package is NumPy, an array-processing library that allows users to work with arrays. NumPy’s main object is a multidimensional array that represents a table of values, indexed by a tuple of integers. Marketing analysts use NumPy to process arrays that store metrics and apply advanced array operations, such as stacking, splitting into sections, and broadcasting.

You can find even more advanced Python libraries in this guide on the top 10 Python libraries for data science from Rashi Desai, a data analyst at Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois.

R
R is a free, open-source programming language and software environment for statistical computing and data plots. The language may be used to clean, analyze, and graph both raw and structured data. Proficient marketing analysts use it to measure the effectiveness of advertising efforts and visualize their performance.

R programming language for data cleansing
R studio UI
JavaScript
Despite being less popular among data analysts, JavaScript also has several libraries for data processing in the stash. For example, Data-Forge, a library inspired by Pandas, offers a whole set of features for data cleansing. It helps analysts with:

Rewriting false data rows
Filtering data rows
Filtering columns
Data aggregation
Etc.

Data-Forge map function for data transformation
Still, programming languages aren’t the only thing to accelerate marketing data cleansing. Third-party tools stand alongside them and generate outstanding results.

Dbt
Dbt helps analysts transform their data in data warehouses using SQL’s select statements. The platform helps them to create complex models, run tests, cleanse and transform data, etc.

As the dbt team says, their product represents the T in ELT (Extract, Load, Transform). Since it’s an all-around tool for data transformation, it can clean up strings, change data types, modify values in the database, and apply different business logic for various marketing metrics.

Dbt became the foundation for the modern data stack (a suite of tools for data integration). In combination with data extraction, loading, and visualization platforms, dbt is shaping the future of marketing analytics.

OpenRefine
OpenRefine lets marketing analysts clean, correct, modify, and expand data without effort. The platform was originally known as Google Refine, since it was actively supported by Google. Later, the tool became open-source and the name was changed to OpenRefine.

With the help of this tool, you can automatically fix typos, convert data to the right format, duplicate datasets, and complete many other actions.

Here’s a video that briefly explains OpenRefine’s data transformation capabilities:


Integrate an ETL system into your data infrastructure
If you don’t want to dig through complex SQL queries and test tens of different libraries, a marketing ETL platform is something you should try out.

ETL stands for extract, transform, load. An ETL platform is an all-in-one tool for all operations with data, from data cleansing to visualization.


If you’re not familiar with ETL platforms, we’ll explain all of the details using the example of Improvado.

Improvado is a revenue ETL platform that handles a full cycle of marketing and sales data operations. At its core, it’s a data pipeline that connects to 300+ marketing and sales data sources to extract performance insights.

Improvado data sources
Some of Improvado's data sources
One of Improvado’s distinctive features is that analysts don’t need to deal with code. Usually, engineers have to create specific queries to trigger the data source’s API and extract insights. Improvado has prepared everything beforehand. With predefined extraction patterns, marketers can connect all data sources automatically.  It takes just a few clicks and doesn’t require any additional actions.

All marketing data sources transfer raw, unstructured data that should be transformed into a digestible format. That’s where marketing data cleansing comes into action. Improvado’s DataPrep module offers new opportunities for data transformation and cleansing.

With the help of prebuilt transformation recipes, marketers can clean their data faster and get the right answers. Instead of building SQL queries, marketers can work with data in a traditional spreadsheet-like UI. Improvado also mitigates the risk of human error, since all actions are automated and follow a predefined pattern.

Improvado's DataPrep UI
DataPrep UI
After all of the marketing data cleansing stages are complete, Improvado loads insights into a data warehouse. From there, analysts can access the data with just a few clicks. Improvado streamlines real-time insights to 15+ visualization tools, so analysts can build a holistic dashboard and get a full report on marketing performance in a single tab.

An ETL platform is the best way to stop juggling tens of analytics tools and gather all of them under the same roof. Improvado itself replaces dbt, data warehouses, the SQL environment, tens of APIs, spreadsheet software, and saves hundreds of hours on manual reporting.

Automate marketing data cleansing with Improvado
Data cleansing is a lengthy and dull process when done manually. The larger your datasets, the more time analysts waste tidying them up. In the marketing world, where you need immediate results and insights, manual cleansing is simply not an option.

Improvado can help you automate your marketing data cleansing and gather granular marketing insights in one place. Schedule a consultation to learn more about us.

